#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass abntex2
\begin_preamble
\input{pagestyle.tex}
%\usepackage{lmodern}
\newcommand{\blankpage}{
\newpage
\thispagestyle{empty}
\mbox{}
\newpage
}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{4}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
customHeadersFooters
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\begin_local_layout
Provides natbib 1
Preamble
% adaptação do suporte ao natbib do LyX para uso do abntex2cite
\AtBeginDocument{%                % garante que este código será carregado após
% \usepackage[alf]{abntex2cite} ou
% \usepackage[num]{abntex2cite}
% no preâmbulo latex.
\RequirePackage{abntex2cite}   % previne o não carregamento do abntex2cite,
% mas não define se as citações serão do
% tipo 'alf' ou 'num'.
\renewcommand{\citeauthor}[1]{\citeauthoronline{#1}}
\def\citep{\cite}
\newcommand{\citeyearpar}[1]{(\citeyear{#1})}
\ifx\AbntCitetype\AbntCitetypeALF
\def\citet{\citeonline} % alf
\newcommand{\citealt}[1]{\citeauthoronline{#1}~\citeyear{#1}}
\newcommand{\citealp}[1]{\citeauthoronline{#1},~\citeyear{#1}}
\else
\def\citet{\@ifnextchar[{\citet@with}{\citet@without}} % num
\def\citet@with[#1]#2{\citeauthoronline{#2}~\cite[#1]{#2}}
\def\citet@without#1{\citeauthoronline{#1}~\cite{#1}}
\newcommand{\citealt}[1]{\citeauthoronline{#1}~\citeonline{#1}}
\def\citealp{\citeonline}
\fi
}
EndPreamble
\end_local_layout
\language brazilian
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "lmss" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command bibtex
\index_command default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder false
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblio_style abnt
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 3cm
\topmargin 3cm
\rightmargin 2cm
\bottommargin 2cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
GARAVITO, J.
 F.
 
\lang english
Ontologies and DSLs in the generation of decision support systems, SustenAgro
 study case.
 Master dissertation (Master Program in Computer Science And Computational
 Mathematics.)
\lang brazilian
 – Instituto de Ciências Matemáticas e de Computação, Universidade de São
 Paulo, São Carlos – SP, 2017.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Phantom VPhantom
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang english
Decision Support Systems (DSSs) organize and process data and information
 to generate results to support decision making in a specific domain.
 They integrate knowledge from domain experts in each of their components:
 models, data, mathematical operations (that process the data) and analysis
 results.
 In traditional development methodologies, this knowledge must be interpreted
 and used by software developers to implement DSSs.
 That is because domain experts cannot formalize this knowledge in a computable
 model that can be integrated into DSSs.
 The knowledge modeling process is carried out, in practice, by the developers,
 biasing domain knowledge and hindering the agile development of DSSs (as
 domain experts cannot modify code directly).
 To solve this problem, a method and web tool is proposed that uses ontologies,
 in the Web Ontology Language (OWL), to represent expert's knowledge, and
 a Domain Specific Language (DSL), to model DSS behavior.
 Ontologies, in OWL, are a computable knowledge representations, which allow
 the definition of DSSs in a format understandable and accessible to humans
 and machines.
 This method was used to create the Decisioner Framework for the instantiation
 of DSSs.
 Decisioner automatically generates DSSs from an ontology and a description
 in its DSL, including the DSS interface (using a Web Components library).
 An online ontology editor, using a simplified format, allows that domain
 experts change the ontology and immediately see the consequences of their
 changes in the in the DSS.
 A validation of this method was done through the instantiation of the SustenAgr
o DSS, using the Decisioner Framework.
 The SustenAgro DSS evaluates the sustainability of sugarcane production
 systems in the center-south region of Brazil.
 Evaluations, done by by sustainability experts from Embrapa Environment
 (partners in this project), showed that domain experts are capable of changing
 the ontology and DSL program used, without the help of software developers,
 and that the system produced correct sustainability analysis.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Phantom VPhantom
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\series bold
\lang english
Keyworks:
\series default
 
\emph on
Ontologies, Domain-Specific Language, Semantic Web, Knowledge Representation,
 Decisioner Framework, Decision Support System, SustenAgro 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
